[SYCL][Graph] Add initial draft of malloc/free nodes ... (#352)
reble/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_graph.asciidoc

|===

==== Memory Allocation Nodes

Support depends on the availablity of backend support for deferred allocation:
link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_virtual_mem.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_virtual_mem]

The following interfaces enables users to define a memory allocation/free operation 
belonging to the scope of the graph. It would be error prone and non-performant
to allocate or free memory as a node executed during graph submission. Instead,
such a memory allocation API needs to provide a way to return a pointer which
won't be valid until the allocation is made on graph finalization, as allocating
at finalization is the only way to benefit from the known graph scope for optimal
memory allocation, and even optimize to eliminate some allocations entirely.

> 

Reviewer: I think people will have the question "if I have two executable graphs created from the same modifiable graph, will that node be different memory allocations?",  so we should state something about that.

Table {counter: tableNumber}. Member functions of the `command_graph` class (memory allocation).
[cols="2a,a"]
|===
|Member function|Description

|
[source, c++]
----

> std::pair<void*,node>

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the concept of an allocation being a node, `sycl_ext_oneapi_virtual_mem` doesn't have allocation as being asynchronous, neither are the UR APIs - https://oneapi-src.github.io/unified-runtime/core/api.html#virtual-memory or L0 APIs - https://spec.oneapi.io/level-zero/latest/core/api.html#memory-functions

i.e. I'm not sure how we'll express node edges.

Reviewer 2: It might be useful from a potential future optimization standpoint if say `alloc` and `free` are both nodes so that it is clear when the memory is and isn't needed, even if we are at liberty to do the actual allocation and freeing whenever we want. From an execution standpoint they can be ignored effectively.

Reviewer: That's a fair point, in the future you could do more optimal memory allocations with that lifetime information.

Author: > That's a fair point, in the future you could do more optimal memory allocations with that lifetime information.

Yes correct, that would be the rationale behind the current draft. If we just return a `ptr` we would lose that lifetime information. Another option certainly would just tie the memory resource to a graph, which could prevent optimizations. If a node handle is returned it can be easily passed to other nodes as a dependency via its properties.

I haven't added any details on when the allocation happens, we could still do it when finalizing the graph.

> i.e. I'm not sure how we'll express node edges.

Internal representation could be similar to an empty node.

Reviewer: Makes sense 👍 resolving this thread

> add_malloc_device(size_t num_bytes, const property_list& propList = {});

Reviewer 2: Could we have this templated so that users can call this similarly to `sycl::malloc_device<T>`? Just saves the users having to do a cast after the call.

Author: Yes, will add. My only reason to start with a single version of this API was not having to update too many functions, in case we change the basic design of this interface.

----

|
Returns a pair of a pointer to memory and a node. The pointer is allocated on the `device` 

> that is associated with current graph by first execution of the `command_graph`.

Reviewer: > first execution of the `command_graph`

Question about whether we want to tighten this more to say something like "allocated during the finalization of command-graph to the returned executable graph".

The current wording leaves open the suggestion that if you never execute the graph nothing will be allocated, but we probably will do the allocation on finalization - which means less latency when submitting the graph.

Author: how about "**may** be allocated during the finalization ... "? That way we can keep our options, depending on the backend.

Reviewer 3: shall we align with line 1723 here?

in line 1723, it says `allocating at finalization is the only way`

All nodes that depend on this node and are thereby executed after have access to the allocated memory.
The allocation size is specified in bytes.

Preconditions:

* This member function is only available when the `command_graph` state is
  `graph_state::modifiable`.

Parameters:

* `num_bytes` - allocation size in bytes.

* `propList` - Zero or more properties can be provided to the constructed node
  via an instance of `property_list`. The `property::node::depends_on` property
  can be passed here with a list of nodes to create dependency edges on.

Exceptions:

> * Throws synchronously with error code `feature_not_supported` if any devices in `context` 

Reviewer: we don't have a context parameter, "if device associated with the command graph does not not have ..."

Author: Thanks, I meant: "any device in the context associated with the graph ..." but let's be more accurate!

> * Throws synchronously with error code `feature_not_supported` if any devices in `context` 
> does not have `aspect::usm_device_allocations`.

Author: ```suggestion
* Throws synchronously with error code `feature_not_supported` if any device associated
with the command graph does not have `aspect::usm_device_allocations`.
```

|

[source, c++]
----
node
add_free(void* ptr, const property_list& propList = {});
----

|
Returns a free node that has been added to the graph. Accesses of nodes that depend of this node
(predecessors) to the allocated memory are undefined behavior.

Parameters:

* `ptr` - memory pointed to by. Must be allocated by `add_malloc_device`.

* `propList` - Zero or more properties can be provided to the constructed node
  via an instance of `property_list`. The `property::node::depends_on` property
  can be passed here with a list of nodes to create dependency edges on.

|===

> 

Reviewer: Heads up that once https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/12366 merges i think we'll need to extend the `node_type` enum to include `malloc_device` and `free`

=== Features Still in Development

> 

Reviewer: The `Memory Allocation API` issues section at the bottom can be removed.

|===

==== Memory Allocation Nodes

Support depends on the availablity of backend support for deferred allocation:
link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_virtual_mem.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_virtual_mem]

> The following interfaces enables users to define a memory allocation/free operation 

Reviewer 3: is there another plan/draft to record the memory allocation/free with record&replay APIs?

The current functions such as sycl::malloc_device are not recorded into a graph with record&replay APIs, we may need new async functions such as sycl::malloc_device_async
